This is July 13, sitting in the study of Raul
Fernandez in San Antonio, and delighted to have
the opportunity to chat with him about his student
days. I think I mentioned to you the first question
I would ask would be, why did you go to A&M in the
first place? Why did you go there instead of
somewhere else? And were you, like me, from a
working class background, and going to college
was a big step? It was a big step, no question. See,
both my parents were born in Mexico and neither
probably finished grade school. However, they
instilled in us, you're going to go to college.
You're going to go to college. And I believed that.
And there was no decision for me to make. I followed
my brothers. And my brother Gus, who was a freshman
in 49, and then Albert. And Gus passed 53, and then
Albert passed 54. And Albert graduated on the
night that I graduated from high school. He
graduated from A&M. And so we just switched
places, and he went back to Laredo, and I went to
College Station. And your class of? 59. 59. And did
you visit A&M before? I had the occasion to go a few
times, both on a, I already had my mind made up, but
we got a day to go visit a college or university. And
the three of us from Laredo, we drove up there and
spent the day at A&M. There was no other
consideration for me. I applied to one
university, and I was very fortunate to have a $250
scholarship, if I remember correctly, from the
Laredo A&M Mothers Club. And God bless them for
that, because at that time, it cost $800 to $900 for
everything for a year. And so that was like a 25%
supplement to what I was about. And so I didn't work
the first semester. But it took me, I crammed four
into five. And 10 semesters, I worked nine. The
first one, I didn't have to. I felt like that was OK.
While you're on that subject of work, what were
your work? At A&M? Where did you work? Well, I had,
most of the time, I worked around the MSC.
Mid-semester of my freshman year I got a job in what
used to be the MSC reading library down the lower
level. It was like a reading library and then it
became something else after that. I started there
and then about towards the end of my freshman year
of the semester, a job opened up making signs in the
basement. I remember the elevator used to go down
and you'd open the doors and you'd go into there,
there'd be a cage right in front of you, a lot of work
in that cage. And we had an embossed graphing
machine there and we made all the signs for the
university. What was your pay, do you remember?
No, but I worked for Herbie Johns. Mr. Johns was
the, I guess he was the manager of the MSC at the
time. Gosh, I don't remember. Maybe 35, 40 cents an
hour. Maybe, maybe 50 cents. Now, did you work in
the MSC nine semesters? Yes, all night. However,
other times I had one other job, and one time I had
three jobs. What were those others? Being an
engineering major, I got the opportunity to work
at TTI, Texas Transportation Institute, and we
did testing of cylinders and the kinds of things we
did in a lab. We learned that, and we'd go over there
and do grunt work and Mike Woodson and Wesley Heald
and I, we were all running buddies. I think Wesley
is just the new chief engineer for the highway
department, if you heard his name bad around. So we
would work at that. My brother Gus worked with me
three years in making signs, because right after I
got there, the brother person was there left, and
so I got Gus to come in there, and so we worked
together. How did When you got, let's go back now
to, you're going to enroll as a freshman. How did
you get there on that trip? When I went to
university, a dear friend of mine, Danny Flores,
his mother, his mother took Danny and David
Loudell and me, and she drove us up there. I shipped
a footlocker and took a little Samsonite suitcase
that I'd been given, Describe what was in those two
containers. What did you take with you?
Not much. Not much, Haskell. Towels, sheets,
underwear.
We didn't have a whole lot of clothes. We just
didn't in those days. And enough clothes to escape
when you could. And not a whole lot. not a
typewriter no not a radio uh wasn't a freshman
privilege in our call but uh it wasn't it wasn't on
the first on the first trip did you i'll call us of it
did you take in a civilian suit or dress coat
i don't think so do you remember how long the drive
took an hour it's a six hour drive okay okay between
six and seven hours okay even even the expressways
yeah i drive right through san antonio from Right
up all the, up from Broadway and up Nogalitos.
Because San Antonio is almost exactly halfway,
isn't it? Exactly. Describe how you, where did you
get out at and where did you put your stuff? You
know, move me into the dormitory. Yeah.
The other, let me see. I was in, I was in, assigned to
B-triple-A. There was only one, no, there was two
core areas at the time. We just drove up to the core
area. The new core area. Around Duncan. Around
Duncan, yeah. Actually, I don't know. We called
the new area dorms 16, 17, and 18. I was in dorm 17 my
freshman year. And Danny was in the same area.
Regiment, we were 2nd Regiment, and he was in
Quartermaster's. And then Dave was an engineer,
so he was over there on Duncan. We were over there by
Sabisa. Oh, you were by Sabisa? Yeah. We had two
corps airs there. Do you remember any sudden
realizations that you now were in the corps that
first day? Did anything happen? Any sophomore
pounce on you? No, I really don't remember that
happening. We got there probably before the
sophomores did. And we kind of had a weekend with
the first sergeant and maybe a few other people.
And the sophomores got there Sunday night. Did you
go to fish camp? No. No, I did not. I don't do that any
fish camp tonight. I don't know. No. What about
registration? Do you remember that, that first
time?
Frankly, no. I really don't remember. I remember
the registration process. It was just something
you had to do. You didn't ask. We just did what we had
to do. Tell me about how you got oriented, broken
into, introduced to being a fish. How did the
sophomores? Frankly, I thought it was a game. It
was, to me, it was a game. And I wasn't intimidated
by the sophomores. I knew what to expect. Both my
brothers had been in the Corps. And they couldn't
eat me. And I was in a reasonable outfit. They were
pretty tough, but we were tougher. And we took
great joy in hazing sophomores. And I think we did a
real good job of it. A lot of people knew my name.
Describe your room, your fish year, physically.
What was in it? What did it look like? Okay, we had,
you know, you walk in, depending on what side of
the, the laboratories were, say if I walk in, the
laboratories on the right, we actually had a
closet behind the door, and then you had a, of
course, the other closet from the other unit, I
guess, was there, too. We had a laboratory. We had a
double metal... metal bed, bunk bed. And they each
came with a mattress, and I think they came with a
pillow too. And there was two desks at the end.
There was a window at the end with a radiator, one of
those steam jobbies. And the closet was small. We
didn't have much. And we got more clothes there
assigned to us by the department, the military
science department. and then we probably brought
up there, I think we must have had at least two or
three uniforms issued and fatigues. Of course, we
supplemented that and bought more other uniforms
that really had form fit, so you wouldn't look like
cadet slouch. Did you have anything, any
decoration on the wall or the floor? Nothing.
Curtains? Absolutely not. And what floor? Fourth
floor. Tufts, as a freshman, are the best for
studying. Oh, I hadn't thought about that. But you
meet a lot of people. And you also get very fast
going upstairs. And you can just slip around the
end of the metal banisters going up and down, where
you just grease out those things. But you had to
meet them anyway, sooner or later. So you might as
well just do it. And so we got to meet all the
freshmen. And sophomores and seniors, there were
the other two. I was in B-triple-A. Did it have a
nickname? No, we didn't use nicknames at that
time. We were B-anti-aircraft artillery, and we
were proud of it. And these kids today are proud of
what they are, and that's okay. But A-triple-A and
B-triple-A and C-triple-A were the same door. And
the way the selection process went, whichever
unit was the top unit in the scoring for general war
got their choice of floors. And if you were the best
out there in that battalion, you always took the
top floor because it was the quietest, even though
you had to go up three flights. But at that age, and
even now, it's not a problem. Take me, let's make
believe we're in the middle of the fall, your fish
year. Take me through a typical class day. In other
words, a Monday through Friday. What time did you
get up and so forth? Ah. I know when we got up, we
didn't have a whole long time to get ready and hit
the quad for formation to mark to breakfast and the
whistle jock would run up and down the halls
blowing the whistle and saying how long time it was
to formation and you'd get a I'd wake up and then
you'd have a warning to the time, to formation.
You'd want your breakfast. And then we would, if we
were really quick, we'd do some of our room before
we left or when we got back when you, when you tidied
up your room and your, got your, got your things
together. But you had to leave your room straight.
You had to leave it absolutely tip-top. And a lot of
time before we'd go to bed at night, we had
everything except maybe wiping down your lab or
clean a mirror or straighten out something that
might have, you know, beds were always made. I
can't remember if we made them before we left or
probably after because you had to hustle with two
people to get out to formation and make sure you had
all your grass on. It took a long time at first, but
then after a while, after you got, you knew the
game, what they were looking for, it wasn't a
problem. Right, and you all fell in where? In front
of the dorm. And march to? March to Sabisa. Then go
back to, after breakfast, go back? Go back on your
own. And do what? Well, you finish cleaning up your
room. Most of us had class at 8 o'clock. Did you ever
take care of a sophomore's room also, or a
junior's? No. You didn't have that? I did not do
that. All right. Then noon, did you all fall out and
march? Absolutely. We'd have a... Formation,
probably 10 to five minutes before the hour, and
march to lunch. And you were at formation.
Everybody was at formation. Most seniors were at
formation, too. Of course, there wasn't any place
else to eat. You either ate there or at the MSC. And
everybody went. All right. Then in the
afternoons,
what if you had any spare time? Well, I never had a
whole lot of spare time. maybe that first
semester, but that time you're trying to adapt to
college life and playing the game.
But we took too many classes, bottom line. I think
we were dumb or we weren't counseled as well as kids
are today. But consequently, you'd end up, you're
taking 17, 18 hours and maybe you only pass 14 or 15.
And a lot of us, A lot of us did that. I'm not ashamed
of it. But the important thing is to never quit. I
flunked
countless, three times before I passed it. Passed
it on the fourth time, but I never quit.
But we always had time to get back. We had
intramurals. That was part of our company
strategy Everybody participate. Professional
played with freshmen, then upperclassmen had
their own deals. We would march a lot.
Before dinner, we weren't doing intramurals
unless somebody had someplace to be. The unit had
things to keep us busy and keep us on task. Learn how
to march was important to this group and important
to me. There was always training going on. How was
supper different in routine if it was to lunch and
breakfast? Had a little more time. And there was
more time for old, trained freshmen. And it was a
sophomore job. And seniors and juniors would play
with us. You know how that goes. Describe the task
of a typical fish Well we sat in the middle and
you're passing stuff and or in the hot corner. In
the hot corner you got the food from the waiter at
that time it was family style and the waiters would
come and you'd have to you know grab it off the
waiters and pass it around but usually the juniors
and seniors sat on the outside fresh on the hot
corner and then I think there was eight to the table
if I remember correctly it could have been ten and
you had at least one or two sophomores at the table
and One or two freshmen. I understand that some
Aggie food had a special Aggie name. They all had
names. Can you remember as many of those as you can?
Oh, probably. Bread was gunwadi. Mustard was
baby. Eggs were cackle, I believe. Bullmeck,
obviously, was meat. And there were just a lot
of... Beans? I don't remember what beans were.
Corn? Ketchup? Ketchup and blood, yeah. Let's
see, tea, coffee,
dessert. Dessert was a kush. And all dessert was
kush? All dessert was kush. It was pie or cake?
Yeah, everything. And from there came the kush
questions. Did you ever, when you were home, did
you ever forget and asked for something. I'm sure
we all did. And maybe some of them I did on purpose.
In an Aggie fashion? Yeah. Oh, yeah. Let's see. All
right. Now, did your freshman year, did you and
your classmates ever wait till all the
upperclassmen left? If you wanted to eat. So you
could really eat? Sure. But they always left in
time to make sure we had enough time to eat. I mean,
they didn't stick around. They had to go, too. But I
never left the mess hall hungry. I never, ever left
the mess hall hungry. In general, what was the
quality of the food? I thought it was great.
Frankly, it was good. Did you have a particular
favorite dish, as you think back on it? I had a real
standard stomach, and there may have been some
favorite, but it was reasonably good. Was there
any that you all really disliked? I've not heard of
any. I was just wondering. I don't even think they
ever service . That's one of the things I'm already
fond of. Everything else is fine. Define hazing as
it was in your day. What happened in or around the
dorms that an investigator today would say, oh,
that's hazing? Nobody ever touched me. Nobody
ever hit me. Now, we might have been out at a company
party or something. And if you wanted to trade
licks with a broom with a sophomore and you felt
like that was as close as I would say, never. Nobody
ever beat my ass. I don't remember. Not many have
said that. Usually a broomstick or part of a
baseball bat. Nobody. Absolutely. Only in fun,
like I say, and we pride ourselves on being able to
take a lick or give a lick. But you would trade, and
that was okay. And some of them were popping pretty
good. All right, but push-ups and duck walking,
what else?
We didn't run like the court runs today, but I
learned hold the wall up. You heard that game?
Describe it. Well, where you put your back on the
wall and you form a chair-like with your legs, with
your with your thighs being parallel to the floor.
And it really builds up your legs really good.
Sometimes you do it so long, they start to tremble
and you fall down. But it builds a little
character, especially if you're trying to get
your attention. I can't recall what all the...
Now, would a sophomore direct you to hold the ball
up? Oh, yeah.
So be freshman, give me five. Would that be
push-up? Five or more, I suspect. But now the
juniors do push-up because they love their class
year. Four guys from 99 are going to have a problem.
But we didn't do that. So we didn't do push-ups. And
then after a while, we'd just do it ourselves just
to build up. We could compete with sophomores and
show them that, hey, I can take it. And we duck
walked. We duck walked a lot. Duck walked in your
raincoat, in your helmet, liner. We did that, even
the sophomores, when we stole the junior blouses.
And we had a lot of fun with them on that. Describe
that. Okay. When we were sophomores, you know, the
junior ball comes up, and the custom, the
tradition was the sophomores would go over and
steal the junior's uniform so that they couldn't
go to the ball. And the game was they would, torment
you and haze you until you say, we give up. And of
course, nobody ever gives up. Finally, the CO will
come and say, all right, guys, give it back to them.
Oh, okay, we don't want to, but we'll do it. And we
had a couple of juniors, we had a couple of
gentlemen who were, I remember Dan Greenberg in
Houston, he was a vet major, and he wore glasses
about that thick of Coke bottles, and he didn't get
a contract, but There was one other, one other, I
can't remember who that was. But anyway, when we
said we're gonna, we had a sophomore meeting and
we're going to steal the blouses. And I said, you
know, we can't leave Dan Greenberg out. I mean,
he's part of this group. And so we, and there was one
other. So anyway, we said the mission. I think I
went to Greenberg's room and his roommate was
there. And I said, Dan said for me to come up and pick
up a suit. He wanted me to take it to the cleaners.
Grab her suit. It's the funniest thing. We were the
first meeting that they called the sophomores in.
And they're sitting on the beds, and we're sitting
on the floor like freshmen again with our knees
under our chins. And bang, the door just busts
open. And damn Greenberg walks in, says, where's
that damn bully Fernandez? He stole my suit. Sir.
Anyway, so yeah. You learn a lot of things in that.
There was an incident, and I probably won't touch
on that, that happened that
sophomores learn, even at that stage, juniors
rather, even at that stage, you've got to watch
what you say. And that's the place to learn, to make
a mistake, not after your professional life or
other things. But it isn't fun. You're saying
politely. Here's somebody said something very
indiscreet. Well, it was one of those things that
is not acceptable. It's one of the rules. You can't
do that. And it was said. And everybody just got up,
the sophomores. And it was directed at me. And we
hadn't rehearsed that. And we were duck walking.
And the term was, do you? get the duck walking
faster. Do you understand that? Or do you want me to
tell you in Spanish? And it wasn't rehearsed.
Everybody got up in unison. I said, you violated
the rules of the game. And we all left and went to one
of the rooms. And they screwed up. That night, they
couldn't touch us anymore. And actually, we beat
them at their game. And it wasn't malicious. It
wasn't anything. And this... The young man that
said it was from the valley. And there was never any
later retribution for young people. Absolutely
not. I guess that was even the one I had to say. That
was the closest to a lot of popular questions. Were
there anything, being a minority, being a
Mexican-American, was there any... Anything
ever directed at you? No, not ever. Never. I'm not
texting anything. Now, the people that I've
interviewed up through the war, through World War
II, have said that there were nicknames that were
not at all intended to be derisive. Oh,
absolutely. But that they referred to some of the
Jewish students as Jew boy. And... Those are
Lebanese background. We had our first sergeant,
Paul Moenis, a Greek, and we all called him Greek.
We were proud of those kinds of things. I had a
nickname, which was Bully, but I grew up with that.
When my friends went up with me, to me, that was my
only name because I never went by Raul. People say,
when they drop handles, what's your name? I say
Bully because that's what everybody ever called
me. Alright, was there ever, let's work on the
minority bit of it, was there ever any, were you
ever called Mexican or Latino? Never. Never a
problem. Was that true, as far as you know, pretty
well campus-wide? Absolutely. But at that time,
there were no blacks in Texas A&M, by law. And I grew
up in Laredo, and I didn't even know the minority. I
didn't find out maybe until I was 25 or 30. I don't
know. But in Laredo, everybody spoke Spanish and
everybody spoke English. And it was a great
community by that standard. Now, you were
bilingual. Absolutely, yes. And did that, at A&M,
was that anything unusual? Was that to your
advantage or disadvantage? Well, I got an A in a
three-hour course, which is a great place
to compete. It was an advantage, not as far as being
in the Corps or anything else. It's always been an
advantage to me. As a student,
it didn't make any difference. Did you, was your
freshman roommate, your fish hole lady, did that
person become a special friend? I went through
several. Oh, so. Remember when you sat down that
first day, the first sergeant told us, you know,
look to your left, look to your right, because that
guy's not going to be here at the end of this year. We
lost a lot of them. I don't think my freshman
roommates made it. There's only about 11 or 12 of
us. Are there some special friends, though, from
your class? Christ. Who are the most special?
Those are the friends that you have forever and for
life. Who are the most special ones? Well, all the
guys in my outfit were special. Maybe one or two
that had others, but we were so close because...
Most of us, and even those that did have something,
you didn't know it. And, you know, I can, well, Paul
Moenis, he was also a CE major, civil engineering,
and Wesley Hill, who's now the highway engineer,
state of Texas, Mike Woodson, Tommy Lohman is my
dear friend. We still go skiing together. Our
wives are close. Our wives are closer than we are, I
think. And they just tolerate us and invite us
along wherever we go. But some I don't see, and some
have died. But John Thomas, our class agent, was in
our activity. All right, describe for me some of
the pranks, the good bull that you knew about,
whether you were involved in or not. Oh, I was
involved in most of it. All right, describe some of
them. The question of the drown outs are always
special. That's a lot of fun to drop a waste can of
water on a sophomore. When I was a sophomore, I've
done it a million. It's okay, the scar I have under
my chin, diving out of bed and catching the
backside of that freshman and I missed and I fell
down and got a scar to prove it.
We, let me see, some of the real neat things that we
did there. Poor Buddy Majan. Buddy, he's from the
Valley. And one time we had a fish, we had a fish beer
bust. Totally illegal, obviously. But we went
out, us freshmen, and we had a party. And so we were
out there in the, some open farm, ranch land,
something like that. Maybe out in the pits, I don't
know. And we were out there. drinking beer and
joined fellowship and the poor armadillo came
through the area and it was night and that's when
armadillos come out. And so we, of course it was a
bunch of freshmen trying to catch an armadillo and
we finally caught him. And we didn't hurt him, we
just caught him. And I said, well now we got him.
What are we going to do? Somebody said, let's put
him in Buddy Major's bed. And so this armadillo was
half scared to death. And he might, you know, he was
trying to act possum. I think he was half possum. So
when we got back to the dorm, we were probably a
little rowdy. And the sophomores always need a
good reason to get after you. But that armadillo
ended up in Buddy Major's bed. And Bobby Muller, he
was He frogged in, so it was already our second
semester. Bobby Mueller, Frog Mueller, was one of
Major's favorites because Bobby was a frog. And as
a matter of fact, he called him into his room, and he
was sitting there fussing for something. And he
was in the process of getting into bed. And I mean,
he came out of that bed like a rocket. You know, Joe
Fenton. Joe was Buddy's roommate, and Joe
witnessed that. That was so funny. I could just,
and Joe tells it even better. I mean, it's just
hilarious. And Bobby was the one that put it in
there. And Buddy didn't know that, but he just, you
know, he was getting him in there for some kind of
training. And, you know, we would always find.
Now, what was the retribution for that? Oh, I'm
sure we paid the price. Now, that's the kind of good
story that I very much want in here. Do you remember
any others? No, that one's special. Let me think
here. Did you all ever put any or know of any
explosives that were put in someone's room? Those
were dangerous. I hear there's some people that
might have done that. I've never had the pleasure
of doing that. No Babel bombs? Babel bomb. Yeah,
there was, you know, you really had to, they
really...